[ WHIRRING ]
[ SUSPENSEFUL MUSIC PLAYS ]
Narrator:
MAY 1, 2014.
A NASA PLANE IS MONITORING
ICE THICKNESS OVER GREENLAND,
AN ARCTIC WILDERNESS MORE THAN
TWICE THE SIZE OF TEXAS.
[ WHIRRING ]
BELOW THEM, THE CREW NOTICES
SOMETHING UNUSUAL.
YOU HAVE THIS WIDE EXPANSE,
BUT THEN THERE'S AN OBJECT.
♪♪
IT APPEARS TO BE THIS BLACKENED
ARM COMING OUT OF THE ICE.
♪♪
Narrator:
IMAGE ANALYST MARK D'ANTONIO
DIALS UP THE MAGNIFICATION
AND DISCOVERS
SOMETHING DISTURBING.
YOU CAN SEE A LITTLE BIT MORE
DETAIL ABOUT WHAT WE HAVE HERE.
THIS IS ACTUALLY
AN AIRCRAFT WING
AND PART OF
AN AIRCRAFT FUSELAGE.
♪♪
THE IDEA OF BEING IN A PLANE
CRASH IS SCARY ENOUGH,
BUT THEN IMAGINING CRASHING
IN A PLACE LIKE THIS,
THAT'S SO DESOLATE,
SO REMOTE,
THAT'S GOT TO BE ONE OF THE MOST
FRIGHTENING THINGS IMAGINABLE.
Narrator:
BUT NOT AS FRIGHTENING
AS WHAT THE TEAM SPOTS
IN THE SNOW NEXT TO THE PLANE.
THESE ARE BIG ANIMAL TRACKS
AND, IN THIS PART OF GREENLAND,
THERE'S ONLY ONE THING
THAT COULD MAKE THEM --
POLAR BEARS.
♪♪
Narrator:
POLAR BEARS CAN CONSUME
OVER 300 POUNDS OF MEAT
IN A SINGLE SITTING.
THAT'S ROUGHLY 1.5 PILOTS.
IF YOU FIND YOURSELF
IN THIS PART OF THE WORLD,
ESPECIALLY IF YOU
ARE SICK OR INJURED,
YOU ARE NOW PART
OF THE FOOD CHAIN,
AND NOT AT THE TOP.
♪♪
Narrator:
AVIATION RECORDS REVEAL
THAT THERE HAVE BEEN
NO LARGE PLANE CRASHES
IN THIS AREA FOR DECADES.
A SEARCH OF WORLD WAR II
ACCIDENTS
YIELDS A POSSIBLE CLUE.
THERE WAS A B-17 THAT WAS
DISPATCHED DURING WORLD WAR II,
LOOKING FOR A CARGO PLANE
THAT WENT MISSING.
THAT B-17 CRASHED
IN THIS GENERAL AREA.
Baker:
COULD THIS BE IT?
IS THIS THE PLANE
THAT WENT DOWN?
♪♪
Narrator:
ON NOVEMBER 9, 1942,
A B-17 FLYING FORTRESS TAKES OFF
FROM ONE OF THE U.S. MILITARY'S
WORLD WAR II AIR BASES
IN GREENLAND,
TO SEARCH FOR A CARGO PLANE
THAT CRASHED FOUR DAYS EARLIER.
♪♪
BUT THE B-17 ALSO CRASHES.
THE PLANE CRASHES,
BUT IT'S A CONTROLLED CRASH
AND THE NINE CREWMEN SURVIVE.
♪♪
Narrator:
THE MILITARY DISPATCHES
A SEAPLANE,
WHICH RESCUES TWO
OF THE STRANDED CREWMEN
BEFORE RETURNING
TO PICK UP ONE MORE.
AND THEN YOU'RE NOT GONNA
BELIEVE WHAT HAPPENS.
THAT PLANE THEN CRASHES
AND ALL THREE MEN
ONBOARD ARE KILLED.
♪♪
Narrator:
OVER THE FOLLOWING WEEKS,
THE MILITARY
LAUNCHES SEVERAL ATTEMPTS
TO RESCUE THE REMAINING
STRANDED AIRMEN.
ALL FAIL.
THE SIX CREW MEMBERS
AND A RESCUE-SLED DRIVER
WHO HAD MANAGED TO REACH THEM
MUST FACE THE ONSLAUGHT
OF AN ARCTIC WINTER
PROTECTED ONLY BY THE WRECKED
FUSELAGE OF THEIR B-17.
[ WIND BLOWING ]
THEY'RE THERE
FOR AN ENTIRE MONTH.
NOW, WHAT'S IT LIKE BEING,
FOR A MONTH, ON THE ARCTIC?
IT'S HELL.
Pappalardo:
IT'S -40°.
YOU ARE IN A WORLD OF HURT.
ONE OF THE CREW MEMBERS DEVELOPS
GANGRENE IN BOTH HIS FEET
AND THEY ACTUALLY FALL OFF
INSIDE HIS BOOTS.
Narrator:
TORMENTED BY HUNGER,
FROSTBITE, AND DELIRIUM,
ON JANUARY 4, 1943,
THE TEAM SPLITS UP.
♪♪
A MONTH LATER, A SEARCH TEAM
FINDS THREE OF THEM ALIVE
AND, ON MARCH 18th,
[ DOGS BARKING ]
AFTER 133 DAYS ALONE ON THE ICE,
THE REMAINING CREW
FIND SANCTUARY.
THEIR ABSOLUTELY
REMARKABLE SURVIVAL
IS ONE OF THE GREAT
ENDURANCE STORIES OF ALL TIME.
♪♪
Narrator:
ANALYSTS CONSIDER
IF THE IMAGE HAS CAPTURED
THE CREW'S WRECKED PLANE LOCKED
IN THE ICE FOR OVER 70 YEARS.
YET, WHEN D'ANTONIO
CAREFULLY STUDIES ITS WING,
HE CASTS DOUBT ON THIS IDEA.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE SIZE
OF THE WINGSPAN,
FROM WING TIP TO WING TIP,
THIS DISTANCE IS ABOUT 140 FEET.
THAT'S TOO LARGE FOR A B-17.
I WOULD BANK ON THIS BEING
A B-29 SUPERFORTRESS CRASH.
[ ENGINE ROARS ]
Narrator:
AVIATION JOURNALIST
JOE PAPPALARDO CONFIRMS
THAT B-29 SUPERFORTRESSES MADE
FREQUENT FLIGHTS OVER GREENLAND
AS PART OF THE UNITED STATES'S
COLD WAR SURVEILLANCE CAMPAIGN.
THEY WERE DUBBED FERRET FLIGHTS
BECAUSE THEY WERE TRYING
TO FERRET OUT INFORMATION
ABOUT THE SOVIET UNION
AND ALL OF THEIR
CLANDESTINE AIRFIELDS.
Narrator:
PAPPALARDO LEARNS
THAT, IN 1947,
ONE OF THESE SUPERFORTRESSES,
CALLED THE KEE BIRD,
CRASHES NEAR THE SITE
IN THE AERIAL IMAGE.
♪♪
THIS ELEVEN-MAN CREW
HITS A VERY BAD STORM.
[ SUSPENSEFUL MUSIC CLIMBS ]
THE B-29 COMES DOWN,
BUT EVERYONE ON BOARD SURVIVES.
♪♪
Narrator: THE B-29 REMAINS
UNTOUCHED FOR 47 YEARS.
♪♪
IN 1994, A TEAM OF ENGINEERS
ARRIVE AT THE CRASH SITE,
DETERMINED TO MAKE HER
AIRWORTHY AGAIN,
AND SPEND MONTHS FITTING NEW
ENGINES, PROPELLERS, AND WHEELS.
GREAT IDEA, I SUPPOSE.
[laughs]
I DON'T KNOW THAT I'D WANT
TO SPEND 10 MONTHS
IN THOSE CONDITIONS,
REKITTING ENGINES ON A B-29,
BUT THAT'S WHAT THEY DID.
♪♪
Narrator:
ON MAY 21, 1995,
THE TEAM FIRES UP
THE SUPERFORTRESS' ENGINES
AND SHE PREPARES
TO TAKE TO THE SKIES
FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN HALF A CENTURY.
[ EXPLOSION ]
BUT THEN, A FUEL LEAK
IN THE FUSELAGE STARTS A FIRE
THAT QUICKLY ENGULFS THE PLANE,
DESTROYING IT IN MINUTES.
D'Antonio:
THAT HAD TO BE HEART-WRENCHING.
I CAN'T EVEN IMAGINE
WHAT THEY FELT.
Baker:
IT'S LIKE GREENLAND
MIGHT BE CURSED, RIGHT?
I MEAN, YOU COULDN'T
WRITE THAT ENDING.
♪♪
Narrator:
TODAY, THE KEE BIRD REMAINS
LOCKED IN THE GREENLAND ICE,
A HAUNTING RELIC OF THE
COLD WAR, FROZEN IN TIME.
Walters:
IN A WAY, I THINK IT'S FITTING
THAT SHE DIDN'T FLY OFF.
SHE'S LIKE A MEMORIAL
TO ALL THOSE BRAVE MEN
WHO FLEW THOSE MISSIONS
OVER THAT PART OF THE WORLD.
♪♪